Technical 

The project described in this proposal 
involves the implementation of computer 
software and the design of data-sharing 
protocols concerned with analyzing patient 
outcomes in the context of radiology 
and diagnostic imaging.  This proposal 
takes, as its starting point, the Cancer Imaging 
and Phenomics Toolkit (CaPTk), developed 
at the Center for Biomedical Image Computing 
and Analytics (CBICA) at 
the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, which is an extensible image-analysis 
platform.  CaPTk is designed to serve as a 
central PACS (Picture Archiving and Communication 
System) application which is supplemented 
by extensions that implement specific analytic 
methods.  We propose developing extensions 
which enable clinical outcomes data to be 
integrated into image-analysis computations.  
This work will use CaPTk as a software system, 
but also develop data-sharing protocols and 
code libraries that we will introduce as 
extensions to other radiological software 
platforms, and also formalize in such 
a way that similar techniques can be 
used in other medical imaging and 
Patient-Centered or Comparative Effectiveness 
Research contexts.  

Given its innovative 
architecture, CaPTk can be used both as a 
framework for the study of image corpora 
assembled for research purposes and as a 
vehicle for implementing and demonstrating 
new methods or algorithms for the automated, 
Machine Learning, and/or AI-driven analysis 
of diagnostic images.  By applying 
sophisticated "Machine Vision" to medical 
images, the scientific community hopes to 
achieve diagnostic capabilities which are 
not only more accurate, but also more 
granular: identifying the 
cause of patients' symptoms, but also 
indicating which treatment plans would 
likely be the most conducive to favorable outcomes.

In order to integrate diagnostic 
imaging rigorously into patient-centered 
and "personalized" medicine, it is 
necessary to develop new protocols for 
curating clinical and outcomes data 
alongside image corpora.  This 
"radiological outcomes" priority 
has spurred several initiatives 
to standardize new diagnostic-imaging 
technology and "reporting" vocabularies.  
Such projects can be thematically compared 
with CaPTk, in that both envision 
conventional image analysis being supplemented 
with novel data-curation and analytic 
techniques.  The current proposal, therefore, 
suggests making these parallels explicit, 
by formally introducing outcomes analysis 
as a further methodology and source of 
statistical parameters available for 
CaPTk and similar image-analysis systems.
 
Given CaPTk's deliberate extensibility as part of 
its essential design, it is both technologically 
and philosophically consistent with 
CaPTk's structure to introduce extensions 
which focus on the analytic convergence 
or cross-referencing between image-analysis 
and outcomes data; and to implement data-sharing 
protocols among CaPTk modules which model 
clinical and outcomes information alongside 
image data.  In this sense, CaPTk is a 
logical starting point for the design 
and situating of hybrid radiological/outcomes 
software in a larger computational context.  
Using extensions to CaPTk as a prototype, 
this project then envisions extending 
this work to other radiological and 
medical-imaging contexts, as will be detailed 
below.

This proposed project is a direct application 
of patient-centered initiatives to the 
diagnostic-imaging domain, because its goal is 
to better integrate digital information which 
is essential to declaring and analyzing patient 
outcomes with image-analysis software.  The 
project is also concretely applicable to 
Covid-19 because radiology is an essential 
component of Covid-19 diagnostics.  Indeed, 
the Radiological Society of North America 
(RSNA) has announced that they are curating 
an AI-focused image repository, with collaboration 
from an international community of hospitals 
and research groups, which can serve as a test 
corpus for image analysis in the Covid-19 and 
SARS-CoV-2 context.  Once published, this 
image repository can serve as a prime example 
of how contemporary image-analysis software 
should ideally be oriented toward working 
with image archives drawn from a diverse  
patient population, not only toward the 
traditional workflow wherein radiologists 
exchange data with one prescribing institution 
so as to provide a diagnosis, with little 
priority for larger-scale/multi-institutional 
data curation.



Public 

Our project combines the contributions of 
an international team of researchers, from 
the United States, Europe, and India, 
for the implementation of computer 
software and the design of data-sharing 
protocols concerned with analyzing patient 
outcomes in the context of radiology 
and diagnostic imaging.  This proposal 
takes, as its starting point, the Cancer Imaging 
and Phenomics Toolkit (CaPTk), developed 
at the Center for Biomedical Image Computing 
and Analytics (CBICA) at 
the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, which is an extensible image-analysis 
platform.  CaPTk is designed to serve as a 
central PACS (Picture Archiving and Communication 
System) application which is supplemented 
by extensions that implement specific analytic 
methods.  We propose developing extensions 
which enable clinical outcomes data to be 
integrated into image-analysis computations.  
This work will use CaPTk as a software system, 
but also develop data-sharing protocols and 
code libraries that we will introduce as 
extensions to other radiological software 
platforms, and also formalize in such 
a way that similar techniques can be 
used in other medical imaging and 
Patient-Centered or Comparative Effectiveness 
Research contexts.  

